[docs] Add SSR section (#880)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/ssr/overview.md

---
title: Server-side rendering (SSR)
eleventyNavigation:
  key: 🧪 Overview
  parent: Server-side rendering
  order: 1
---

<details class="pre-release">
  <summary> 🧪 Pre-release software: not for production.</summary>
  

>   Lit labs packages are published to get feedback from the wider community. This code shouldn't be used in production, but we encourage you to try it out and [file issues](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/new/choose) for any bugs you find. For general feedback, please use the GitHub [discussion](https://github.com/lit/lit/discussions).

Reviewer: We need to style the details so they're clearly part of the note and not the page content. Some kind of box. I also think the note needs some styling to make it like an alert.

I really like the GitHub alert styles with a colorful left border, like
<img width="385" alt="FTNFsSlX0AE8AXq" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/522948/182971851-02860e50-d88e-4c23-9a6b-be4a5e2054e1.png">

But until we update all of our alert boxes, we should stick to a style consistent with our existing boxes:

<img width="786" alt="Screen Shot 2022-08-04 at 4 24 47 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/522948/182971946-52c3fa82-101a-4924-88dd-d5c9ad6914f9.png">

We should use the same labs icon in all places.

Reviewer 2: This change replaces the note with a summary/details element.  Not sure how a summary/details inside a note would work, although that's an interesting possibility.

Author: I like @aomarks's suggestion here https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/pull/880#discussion_r938324232 to shorten & soften the wording so we won't need to collapse and just use our aside styling with the flask icon.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

  For more information about the Lit labs process, see [Lib Labs](/docs/libraries/labs/)

</details>

> Server-side rendering (SSR) can help make pages work without JavaScript, either for robustness or performance reasons, or to work with web crawlers and bots that don't run a full browser. Some sites can render faster if they render static markup first, and optionally hydrate the components afterwards by loading the JavaScript.

Reviewer: We need to be specific with what SSR can do. It doesn't make pages "work" without JavaScript, but _render_ without them. From there the page can be made to work with hydration, or left to be used w/o JS.

Here's an attempt to use lists to make the paragraph more scannable:

```suggestion
Server-side rendering (SSR) can help make pages display without JavaScript by deeply rendering the HTML and CSS of components on the server.

SSR is used for a variety of reasons:
1. Robustness: to make pages render even if the JavaScript fails to load or the user has JavaScript disabled.
2. Performance: Some sites can render faster if they render static HTML first without wanting for JavaScript to load, then (optionally) load the page's JavaScript and hydrate the components.
3. SEO and web crawlers: While the major search-engine web crawlers render pages with full JavaScript-enabled browsers, not all web crawlers support JavaScript.
```

@arthurevans

Reviewer 2: I like this. I'd suggest a couple of minor tweaks to Justin's suggestion.

"SSR is used" => "You can use SSR ..."

Numbered list => bulleted list. Order isn't really significant here, so an unordered list makes more sense.

Elsewhere on the site, we almost invariably format a list like this with a period rather than a colon after initial word/clause. That is:

-  Robustness. To make pages render even if the JavaScript fails to load or the user has JavaScript disabled.

To make that first one into a sentence, might change it to:

-  Robustness. Static HTML renders even if the JavaScript fails to load or the user has JavaScript disabled.

And in the second list item: "wanting" => "waiting"

> Server-side rendering (SSR) can help make pages work without JavaScript, either for robustness or performance reasons, or to work with web crawlers and bots that don't run a full browser. Some sites can render faster if they render static markup first, and optionally hydrate the components afterwards by loading the JavaScript.
> 
> [Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) lets you render Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to support streaming.

Reviewer 3: A suggestion for expanding the intro a bit:

```suggestion
Server-side rendering (SSR) is a technique for generating and serving the HTML of your components, including shadow DOM and styles, before their JavaScript implementations have loaded and executed. The two main reasons to consider SSR are:

- Faster first paint, so that your users see your page sooner.
- Improved indexing by bots that don't run JavaScript.

For a deeper dive into server-side rendering concepts and techniques generally, see [Rendering on the Web](https://web.dev/rendering-on-the-web/) on web.dev.

Lit supports server-side rendering through the [Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme)  package. Lit SSR renders Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to support streaming.
```

> [Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) lets you render Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to support streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) lets you render Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to enable fast performance, low time-to-first-byte, and support streaming.
```

> Server-side rendering Lit elements also utilizes [Declarative Shadow Roots](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/) which is a new browser feature that is [shipping in Chrome](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative) which allows browsers to parse and attach shadow roots just by parsing HTML without the need for JavaScript. A polyfill is available for browsers without support yet whose usage is detailed in the [client API](/docs/ssr/client-api#lit-components) documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server-side rendering Lit elements utilizes [Declarative Shadow DOM](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/), a new HTML feature that is [shipping in Chrome and Edge](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative) which allows HTML to attach shadow roots to element without the need for JavaScript.

Until all browsers ship declarative shadow DOM, a very small polyfill is available that can be inlined into your page. This lets you use SSR for robustness now and incrementally address non-JS use cases as the feature is rolled out in other browsers and crawlers. Usage of the polyfill is detailed in the [client API](/docs/ssr/client-api#lit-components) documentation.
```

Reviewer 2: "to element" => "to elements"
"non-JS" => "non-JavaScript"

Reviewer 2: The middle sentence is still a little confusing.  Basically, we're saying that using it with the polyfill gives you:

- The benefits of robustness _on browsers that support declarative shadow DOM_, BUT
- It will continue to work on browsers that don't support it, as long as they can run JavaScript, AND
- As browsers implement declarative shadow DOM, they'll be able to take advantage of it without you changing your code.

That is an awful lot to put in one sentence. I think starting with "robustness now" makes it confusing. The previous list equates "Robustness" with "works without JavaScript," but that only works on browsers that have native declarative shadow DOM--exactly where you don't need the polyfill. And the polyfill, naturally, doesn't work if you're not running JS. It seems to me like "robustness" is the least relevant benefit here.

Maybe instead something like:

This lets you use SSR now, across a variety of browsers:

- On browsers and crawlers that support declarative shadow DOM, the components should display correctly with or without JavaScript enabled.

- On browsers and crawlers that don't support declarative shadow DOM, the components will display correctly as long as JavaScript is enabled.

??

Author: I get what you're saying but I think the first bullet point is unnecessary since we've already explained DSD is a browser feature that doesn't require JS. This sentence just needs to assure users that a polyfill is available for browsers that don't support it, albeit with a small inlined JS. Maybe we can drop the "robustness" and reword to highlight that SSR can be used for any browsers with JS right now.

> Until all browsers include declarative shadow DOM support, a very small polyfill is available that can be inlined into your page. This lets you use SSR now for any browsers and crawlers with JavaScript enabled and incrementally address non-JavaScript use cases as the feature is rolled out to the rest. Usage of the polyfill is detailed in the [client API](/docs/ssr/client-api#lit-components) documentation.

Reviewer: "robustness" is the page not requiring external resources that could fail to load. The polyfill helps with robustness because we recommend that it's inlined.

> Server-side rendering Lit elements also utilizes [Declarative Shadow Roots](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/) which is a new browser feature that is [shipping in Chrome](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative) which allows browsers to parse and attach shadow roots just by parsing HTML without the need for JavaScript. A polyfill is available for browsers without support yet whose usage is detailed in the [client API](/docs/ssr/client-api#lit-components) documentation.

Reviewer 3: It feels like the overview should maybe mention the integrations up front, to give users a broad idea of how you use Lit SSR? Something like:

```
Lit SSR is a low-level library that you can use directly in your
Node-based server or site generator. A number of [integrations]
have also been published which make Lit SSR work out-of-the-box
for frameworks like Eleventy, Astro, and Rocket.
```

---
title: Lit SSR overview
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Overview
  parent: Server-side rendering
  order: 1
---

{% aside "info" %}

> Pre-release software.

Author: <img width="779" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40413829/182502876-b29324ee-6d95-4173-bc2c-d3141524e97e.png">

This works, including the markdown inside. It does look a little bland. I'm thinking perhaps we could add 🧪 to the sections, and maybe in front of this as well? I'll push up a version with that shortly.

> Pre-release software.

Author: Hmm.. unsure if we need more styling here. When opened, it's hard to tell where the disclaimer ends and where the content begins. Also opening the detail seems to shift the nav menu as well.

> Pre-release software.

Author: Nevermind about the nav menu shifting. However, on smaller widths, the righthand table of contents turns into a collapsible one above the body so there are two collapsible sections on the page. Does this look ok?
<img width="859" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40413829/182951129-5548c5b6-a6eb-4af4-b882-a4b2bd5ff162.png">

Lit labs packages are published to get feedback from the wider community. This code shouldn't be used in production, but we encourage you to try it out and [file issues](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/new/choose) for any bugs you find. For general feedback, please use the GitHub [discussion](https://github.com/lit/lit/discussions).

For more information about the Lit labs process, see [Lib Labs](/libraries/labs/).

{% endaside %}

[Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) lets you render Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node.

> SSR can help make pages work without JavaScript, either for robustness or performance reasons, or to work with web crawlers and bots that don't run a full browser. Some sites can render faster if they render static markup first, then load client-side later, and optionally hydrate components.

Author: Good point. It's possible to think of loading the JavaScript followed by a separate "hydrate" call but I think in this context they functionally are the same thing that would occur together.

Lit SSR works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to support streaming.

> Rendering web components in a server environment incurs some restrictions on component code because most browser DOM APIs are not available, and some concepts like certain lifecycle callbacks don't apply to a server, and streaming rendering occurs in a strict top-down ordering. Server-side rendering Lit elements also utilizes [Declarative Shadow Roots](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/) which is a new browser feature that is shipping in [Chrome](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative) but will require JavaScript polyfill for other browsers.

Author: Some wording was taken from here https://github.com/lit/lit.dev/pull/880#discussion_r925082814

From my understanding, top-down ordering means a child can't affect a parent's rendering, which would be possible client side with asynchronous updates. Perhaps it's worth adding that here to clarify why that's a limitation.

DOM API availability could link to the DOM Emulation section.

---
title: Server-side rendering (SSR)
eleventyNavigation:
  key: Overview
  parent: Server rendering
  order: 1
---

{% labs-disclaimer %}

Server-side rendering (SSR) is a technique for generating and serving the HTML of your components, including shadow DOM and styles, before their JavaScript implementations have loaded and executed.

You can use SSR for a variety of reasons:

> - Robustness. Static HTML renders even if the JavaScript fails to load or the user has JavaScript disabled.

Reviewer 3: I think I'd move Robustness to the end of this list, instead of first.

- SEO and web crawlers. While the major search-engine web crawlers render pages with full JavaScript-enabled browsers, not all web crawlers support JavaScript.
- Robustness. Static HTML renders even if the JavaScript fails to load or the user has JavaScript disabled.

For a deeper dive into server-side rendering concepts and techniques generally, see [Rendering on the Web](https://web.dev/rendering-on-the-web/) on web.dev.

> Lit supports server-side rendering through the [Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) package. Lit SSR renders Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to enable fast performance, low time-to-first-byte, and support streaming.

Reviewer: I would add a section here on status of the library that includes a disclaimer about this library being under very active development and listing some current, hopefully temporary limitations:

- Async component work isn't supported (link to issue)
- isSSR not being available yet (link to issue)
- Declarative shadow DOM (and move most detail to "Client Usage"
- Needing support for the "node" export condition
- TBD Integrations
- ElementRendererRegistry needing to be figured out

Author: I'm not sure if "node" export condition is as much of a limitation worth mentioning here. It's not something that's fixable and it's been available in Node unflagged since 12.16.0, 13.7.0. Major build tools all seem to recognize it and have options for it too.

I've added the rest with links to relevant issues or other parts of the doc.

> Lit supports server-side rendering through the [Lit SSR](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#readme) package. Lit SSR renders Lit components and templates to static HTML markup in non-browser JavaScript environments like Node. It works without fully emulating the browser's DOM, and takes advantage of Lit's declarative template format to enable fast performance, low time-to-first-byte, and support streaming.

Author: Good point. Opted to add the verb.

Server-side rendering Lit components utilizes [Declarative Shadow DOM](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/), a new HTML feature that is [shipping in Chrome and Edge](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative) which allows HTML to attach shadow roots to elements without the need for JavaScript.

Until all browsers include declarative shadow DOM support, a very small polyfill is available that can be inlined into your page. This lets you use SSR now for any browsers and crawlers with JavaScript enabled and incrementally address non-JavaScript use cases as the feature is rolled out to the rest of the browsers and crawlers. Usage of the polyfill is detailed in the [client API](/docs/ssr/client-api#lit-components) documentation.

> Lit SSR is a low-level library that you can use directly in your Node-based server or site generator. A number of [integrations](/docs/ssr/integrations) have also been published which make Lit SSR work out-of-the-box for frameworks like Eleventy, Astro, and Rocket.

Reviewer: wdyt about inlining integrations here?

Lit SSR is a low-level library that you can use directly in your Node-based server or site generator. Check out [an example of Lit SSR used in a Koa server](https://stackblitz.com/edit/lit-ssr-global?file=src/server.js).

A number of integrations have also been published which make Lit SSR work out-of-the-box:
- [Lit Eleventy Plugin](https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit#lit-labseleventy-plugin-lit)
- [Astro integration for Lit](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/integrations-guide/lit/)
- [Rocket](https://rocket.modern-web.dev/)
- ...and more under development!

## Library status

This library is under active development with some notable limitations we hope to resolve:

- Async component work is not supported. See issues [#3219](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/3219), [#2469](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/2469).
- An environment checker for writing conditional code is not yet available. See issue [#3158](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/3158).

> - Only Lit components using shadow DOM is support. See issue [#3080](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/3080).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Only Lit components using shadow DOM is supported. See issue [#3080](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/3080).
```
